Toby, if you would, could you please give me your
full name and tell me a little bit about your
background, how you came to chemical
engineering, and how you came to Texas A&M? Right.
My full name is Philip, one L, Toby, T-O-B-Y,
Eubank, E-U-B-A-N-K. And I grew up in central
Illinois, a farming community. Took a BS degree in
chemical engineering from what was then Rose
Polytechnic Institute, which is now Rose-Hulman
in Terre Haute, Indiana. And then I went on to get a
PhD at Northwestern University in Evanston,
Illinois. And as I was finishing at Northwestern
in what I believe was October of 1960, then I was
looking for a job. Yes, I was in chemical
engineering. Yes,
my family were Ford dealers, both in cars and farm
equipment. And
so my father, who was the master mechanic, wanted
me to become a mechanical engineer. So when I went
to undergraduate school, I had the intention of
becoming a mechanical engineer, but then I got
very interested in chemical engineering because
of its diversity. In fact, it seemed to cover most
of mechanical engineering and a lot of other
things. So I liked the versatility of it. And was
there a pretty good aura, I guess you could say,
surrounding chemical engineering at the time? It
was sort of involved, isn't it? Yes, it was, and
there were jobs and very well paid. And
Rose only had chemical, mechanical, civil,
electrical engineering. They only offered four
degrees at that time. It was very small. I
graduated with 70 total people that year, so very
small engineering school. So this is October
1960. Yes, and that's when I came down here on an
interview trip, and I'd also interviewed at
several other universities, and with Exxon, But I
came down, and I talked to Doc Lindsay on the phone,
and I almost didn't come because Doc was sort of
abrupt, and he said, young man, are you sure you're
really interested in this job? And what I really
didn't know was the history, and that Doc had built
up quite a good department during the late 40s and I
think early 50s, and then had essentially lost the
entire department. And so he was. really quite
discouraged. And so I came down, and what really
impressed me was that I didn't stay in a motel or
hotel. I stayed at Doc's house. And his wife,
Grace, who was really a fine lady, cooked
breakfast, and we had a really nice environment
here. I liked the fact that this was a small town.
much larger than the one I grew up in, but still a
very small, very hospitable place. And later
after the interview trip, then Doc even drove me
back all the way to Dallas airport to catch a plane
back to Chicago. So anyway, I was really impressed
by the hospitality. In fact, it was a very small
department. You didn't take the job. Right. I took
the job here because I also thought the state of
Texas had a lot of, a very good future.
And I thought A&M had a very good future. And it did
turn out that was right. Did the military or
whatever turn you off or on? No, it didn't. I had
taken ROTC at Rose, where it wasn't nearly as
serious as it was here at A&M, but I was used to that.
After I came down here, I actually became a
scholastic advisor to the airports and
dormitories here at A&M. So I sort of enjoyed this
atmosphere. And I was very impressed because when
I arrived, the Aggies were something like, they'd
been like 0 and 11 in football, and they still had
very high spirits and were still very happy and
yelling for the team and all that. So I was very
impressed by that.
And so you arrived here when? I actually arrived in
the first of March of 1961,
straight from Chicago. So it took a while to get
used to this place. I had married in September of
1960, and my wife had worked for IBM in Chicago. She
was one of the first teachers of computers.
digital computers.
So we came down here and then she started teaching
high school at Hearn, and
we later had children.
When you arrived, your offices were in the old
geology building. That's right. The old geology
building. At that time, Petroleum Engineering
had just moved out. They had a new building, which
was Doherty. But we were in there with geology and
all the rocks. And it was quite an interesting
building. We only had hot and cold running water,
though, for the research labs. So it was quite a
challenge to set up experimental equipment. And
it was also totally un-air conditioned. as were
most of the buildings at that time at A&M. And so I
first went out and bought a Frederick air
conditioner. And even though it was half of my
monthly salary, I had decided I was not going to
survive the summer without some air
conditioning. And Doc Lindsay, although he was
originally from Long Island, New York, told me I
didn't need one, that if I just waited about two
years, my blood would thin out and it wouldn't
bother
me. But I thought he was wrong. The sweat would run
down my hands during the summer and onto the ink
pen, and I found it very difficult to write, and it
was also very difficult to really think. What
about your teaching? Well, I was lucky, in a way,
because I came in March. And I didn't have to teach
anything until the next fall. But then it hit. And
in those days, we taught three and four courses a
semester. And I remember teaching as many as 15
actual course hours, and teaching four different
courses. We only had about 17 senior students, so
there was just one section of each course, but
there were really, I believe, just three or four of
us teaching then. Yeah, there were. There was
Charlie Holland, Doc Lindsay, myself, and there
was... Don Harris was still in Ecuador. He'd been
down there a couple years, but... Bill Harris
taught, was teaching part-time, and so was Dick
Davidson.
And Dick had been here a number of years, but he was
still working on his PhD degree. I think he
finished that in 62. So we were pretty thin. We were
teaching a lot of courses. So we all had to teach
about four courses apiece to make all the courses.
Well, of
course, Doc was a well-known character, and he was
probably about one of the finest men I've ever met
as far as personality and honesty.
But he was also a character of first rank. Doc had a
walrus-like mustache, and in his younger days,
he'd worked in a, I think it was a boiler factory.
And so Doc never got over the fact that he had to
shout. And even if he was right in your ear, he would
He would shout, and in those days, well, my office
was right next to Doc's in the old, well, what's now
the geology building. And so if you left the window
open, and we were all on the telephone, we didn't
need extensions because you could hear Doc all the
way out through the window. And Doc was really a
great guy to work for. And he had a lot of really good
personal skills. He had a lot of famous sayings
like, if you have fish to fry, go do it in person. So
if Doc wanted a favor from somebody over in the MSC,
if he was carrying on a short course or something,
he would go over and ask them personally. And he was
well known all across the campus.
it was very difficult to say no to doc lindsay
because he as he put it it was just like christmas
and if you go in there and you ask them something
with big tears in your eyes doc's quotations it
would be hard for them to say no and so doc was was
very good at getting people to do things for him It
was really sort of like Santa Claus. He just didn't
want to say no. Now, he retired in 64, I believe it
was, and Charles Holland stepped in. There was no
search, as such. In those days, you didn't do
things like that. In fact, I interviewed Holland,
and he said, how about it? He thought about it.
Maybe that one day, he said, okay. Right. We
actually knew, I'd say, at least a year in advance,
We knew probably back in 63, because there were
really no secrets with Bob Quincy. He said, I'm
going to recommend Charlie Holland to succeed me
as department head, and it's all pretty well
decided. So that was all done very smoothly, and
like you say, nowadays we'd spend a year and a half
doing a full-blown search. now that was a very nice
smooth transition now and then the next big moment
i guess now roman is growing rather nicely
I think there's some
of that. There's excitement everywhere. I'm
trying to say you are. Back in, I believe, about
1963 or 1964,
Because when I first came to A&M, I did some
research into plasma arc jets. This is not blood
plasma, but this is very high temperature ionized
gas plasma. And in doing that, then I came under
some NASA grants. And so I did research for NASA
from about 64 to the late 60s. And so, I mean, I
particularly had some interest in the space
program. Yes,
yes, we went down there usually once a year for a
general NASA-type briefing. But I don't think
anybody else in the department was really tied to
NASA. You know, as such, there was more
connections, of course, over in the aeronautical
engineering department.
Now, the other big thing, of course, that happened
was, 67 through 68 was when we became Texas A&M
University.
We also admitted, we formally admitted women. and
we did away with the compulsory core during the
first two years. So there were really a lot of
changes here, and we started seeing, we started
almost immediately seeing a great number of women
coming into the chemical engineering classes.
You probably wouldn't remember this, but in the
material I've dug up, the first two women I see
enrolled must have come about 1907, wasn't it
Hannah? Prescott,
Eddard Batcher
and Prescott. Batcher and Prescott, I don't
remember their names. But they were definitely
listed as sophomores in 71. Soon they came in in 72.
And then by 1975, I had a note from Hollis that there
were 20 of them enrolled. I think we had a special
enrollment in 75 before it. 20 of whom were women.
And of course, there were two of them who were out
there. Do you have any special recollection of the
first women or anything like that in the program or
graduates? Well, actually, at least here, we had
women as undergraduates long before we had any as
graduate students. And the first women here as
undergraduates were, they were very
distinguished because they were all Cracker Jack
students. They were really good. And I remember
somewhere around 75, I was giving an exam, and a guy
One of the male students said to me, Dr. Eubank, you
should count yourself lucky that you never had to
compete with these smart female students. And I
thought, that's right. Now later on, then, as we
had more women, and we're now about one third
undergraduates of women, then it started to level
out. And we'd pick up women who were nuts. such
strong students, so they became more the average.
I imagine the early ones were really competitive,
too. They had to be... Yes, they were. Often, I
mean, some of those earlier classes, if you looked
at the very top students, the ones that were above,
say, a 3.4 out of 4, they'd be half women. even
though women were making up maybe 20-25% of the
class. How about places
in the market? Was there any difficulties, or was
it more just pretty much women? Well, actually,
they were much in demand, because the companies
were trying to fill quotas. And I guess one of our
early students, probably not the first, I just
happen to remember, was a gal named Linda
Gonzalez, who was A&M Beauty Queen that year. One
Linda? Linda. Linda Gonzalez. And so Linda was not
only strikingly good looking, but she was also
Mexican-American female. And so she was really
fought after by companies to be hired. She was also
a very good student. She graduated about 3.3 or
3.4. She
went with Chicago Bridge and Iron. Yes, she did.
And I heard from her father maybe 15 years ago that
she was still with them and had a very good career.
Now
as the faculty now, There have been a number of
recent hirings about the training came on, and
Harvey came in, and Anthony came in, and Anthony
came in. But it was a change of nature. You moved in
in 72, to exactly the big
room. Yes.
Let
me
first say, Leo Durbin came in September of 61,
right after I came. We really came about the same
time. But then after that, Ron Darby came in, I
believe, in 65. And then in 67, I think both... Dan
Hanson came, I believe, in 67, and I'm trying to
remember. I think Ray Anthony may have come that
year, maybe a year later. Yeah, I didn't know you
were in 54 or 65. I've been in 54 or 65. So both Darby
and Clem were in second, and you made it in 67. Yeah,
so there's quite a... an increase in the staff
about that time. But, sorry, back to your... One
thing, Holland apparently consciously, and I
don't know if it was a consciously added policy,
was planning to hire young people. Yes. And it
seems to have worked. Yes, that was a conscious
policy, at least after I came here and was
involved, That was definitely our policy. We were
trying to hire young faculty.
We concluded that was simply the way to go. It seems
to really work, because the department
congealed, and people grew in the department, and
you had a good 20 or 30 year stay in there. Yes.
Because of that policy. And I think about that,
because a lot of times, especially in the modern
day, the way you try to bring in some big top dog, the
impact on the academic world is minimal. I think
you have to grow your own. You really do. I like
that, the more I think about it, yes. But, no,
you're right. That was a conscious policy. And the
Department of Supervision had a very strong sense
of cohesion and identity, which is unusual in the
life of the United States. Life's very good. Yes.
But that was wrong. Yes. But your question on...
Yeah, two characters that I've tried to really put
in place. Mikey, who I think was brought in from...
Yes. Dr. Mikey was here when I came, and he was the
director of the cottonseed oil laboratory. I
think he came in under... The Calhoun-Benson
program, everybody needs to teach themselves.
Yes, I think that's right. And I know he taught some
courses. He had all his degrees, I think, in
chemical engineering. He was a very pleasant man.
He couldn't walk well. He had a very pronounced
limb. But anyway,
he was a very pleasant person who was quite low-key
and very easy to get along with. But he didn't
really play a major, I mean, I'd say he didn't play a
real major effect on me. That's part of what I said,
yeah. Some of the Right. And then, of course, Bill
Harris interacted a lot, because he was also in
Cotswold. Yeah, he got drafted the same way,
apparently.
Right, right. Now, what about Wynarty? Wynarty
came in in, you know, about 1758, and came in and
started controlling something, and then the next
year got promoted to fourth professor of chemical
engineering. Yes. Do you know anything about all
of that? Yes. Well, Dick Wynarty was here from when
I came in, and I've become social, first of all.
friends with Dick and his wife. And like you say,
his degrees are all in petroleum engineering. And
Dick had gotten his Ph.D. degree in petroleum
engineering from the University of Oklahoma.
But his Ph.D. advisor was John Calhoun. So that's
There was an original Calhoun-Linardi
connection outside of A&M. So after John Calhoun
came here, then he later brought in Dick Linardi.
And Dick ran what was called the Activation
Analysis Laboratory. And we're just talking
about the space program. But Dick was in charge of a
program whereby they would bend a rocket to the
moon, and then Dick's lab was in charge of
designing a little robot that had a shovel on it,
and it was shoveled up a little bit of moon dirt, and
then it was going to bring it back here, and they
were going to subject this moon dirt to activation
analysis to get a complete chemical analysis of
the Earth or the moon. Okay, good. That's a good
story. That's a good time. Yeah. So, Dick was very
much involved with NASA, and had a great deal of
research running in him. Big laboratory, and Emil
Schweikert, who I think is still head of chemistry
over here, was his original really top scientist,
because Emil was a chemist and knew all about
analysis. So, Dick had sort of gotten himself off
into some things that were more chemical, and he So
later, I remember we agreed to have him as a
professor in chemical engineering, because he
needed a home base. Okay, that's kind of what I
thought. Did he ever teach that? No, I don't think
he ever taught anything in chemical engineering.
He did teach an activation analysis course, and a
number of our students, I think, took the course.
Now, and I think even Swiker appeared at one time as
a professor . Yes, I think so. I think Swiker,
because we tried to align ourselves somewhat with
the activation analysis, it was... That's the
synopsis. Yes, they had a lot of research money,
and, uh, and for when Ernie was quite politically
powerful here at one time, and so, and frankly, we
all We got along very well with Dick, and
enjoyed working with him. Later,
one
of his sons graduated with a degree in chemical
engineering. Anyway, Dick had sort of a long
history, and I think he's still the administrator
down in Houston Yeah, for the medical...well,
it's the entire medical complex down there that
Dick administrates. He said not too long ago, he
said he's in charge of finding parking spaces for
all the medical doctors.
Well, good. That really helped. Now,
one thing you really became involved in was the
extension, forces, and we can't just talk forces.
Yes. When I came in in 61, they had had a program
for about 10, 12 years with Dow Chemical in
Freeport,
where we went in and taught one graduate course a
semester. We'd teach it on Friday night from 6 to 9
o'clock. We'd teach three hours, which would
cover more than the three one-hour lectures here.
And then the students down there, all of whom had a
BS degree already, the students could then gather
in one course a semester, and eventually they'd
get enough courses that they could come up here and
finish off a Master of Engineering by spending one
summer here. But they'd have to take these courses
for about two to three years, or get together
enough courses. And this program was going good.
And then I was to teach, I think it was transport
phenomenon in the fall of 61. But I never did,
because Hurricane Carla hit Texas, I believe, in
late August or early September of 1961 and almost
destroyed Dow Chemical, at least put it under four
feet of water. So Dow spent the entire fall
semester trying to dry out. But then later, I did
teach a number of times at Freeport. And then, I'm
not sure I have the dates all exactly right, but
going into the 1970s, we greatly expanded this
graduate extension program. And we ended up at one
time with five centers down at Freeport. Texas
City, where we taught for Monsanto carbide and
American oil. In the old Monsanto plant, we taught
at Texas City. And then we taught Texas Eastman at
Longview. Actually taught it in Kilgore Junior
High School, which was pretty nice. But that was
all Texas Eastman Kodak. Then we taught at Corpus
Christi for Salonese and Pittsburgh White Glass,
which at that time was a major company in Corpus. We
also taught at Victoria at the Stroman High
School, and we were teaching, it was all carbide,
Port Lavaca plant, and DuPont I forget the name of
the DuPont plant down there, but it's near the
carbide plant.
So we were very busy with this program for a while,
and it had some very positive effects, because
people would take a master's this way, and then
they would decide they want a Ph.D. degree. As one
example, we Never in those days could we get an
undergraduate student from the University of
Texas to come over here and do graduate work. The
good UT undergraduates were all sent to the north
to the top ten ranked schools. Well, under this
program, we ended up with about three or four PhDs
who were undergraduate longhorns who ended up
with a PhD degree from A&M. In fact, one of them is
still a professor at Arizona State and is well
known for some textbooks. anyway we had some good
people who uh once we went into the plants and
started teaching them uh they decided these
aggies weren't too bad and they ended up at a m for a
phd degree i expected that that complimented
it really did because yes and we would walk in uh
like in the fall to dow chemical they would just
have hired probably 100 chemical engineers. And
they would use us as a recruiting tool, saying that
Freeport wasn't the end of the world, and that they
could get a master's degree by night school right
there in the plant. And we'd walk into a class that
had 40 or 50 people, and their degrees would be from
all over the country. So we'd have everybody in
that class. And it was a lot of fun to teach them. And
we were, as professors, we were paid extra to teach
those courses. So we were reasonably well in the
first, but it was sort of a blast. When I first
started, because I was still quite young, I would
just drive to Freeport on Friday afternoon, teach
the class for three hours, and jump back in my car
and drive back here. I'd usually be back here by
midnight or a little after. But later I got to the
point where I always stayed over because I
couldn't face the trip. And usually, well, with
Corpus, what I did was, in those days I drove to
Austin Airport and took a plane in. Corpus was not
really easy to get to, and it's about a five-hour
drive, so it's a little far to drive. But we all
drove to Kilgore in Texas City, and I think, yeah,
we all drove to Victoria, which is about a
three-hour drive.
In the short courses, And you were pretty much as
well involved in both existing and short courses
as well. Yes. Another job that Doc Lindsay talked
me into when I first arrived was to take over the
instrumentation short course, which was
started, I believe, in 1946 here at A&M
by bringing instrument companies up and having a
about a three-day symposium, involved both the
users and vendors of instruments. And later on,
this got into a lot more of computer control and
computer companies. So it rapidly was becoming
very high-tech. But this was started by Doc
Lindsay and some industrial people in 1946. And
later, Charlie Holland and had gotten a job of
being director. And that worked quite well. But
then after that, because when I first came here,
Charlie Holland was really doing everything. He
was handling all the odd jobs for the department.
And so Charlie was very glad to see me come, because
I immediately got all the odd jobs at the
department, including instrumentation and
symposium. And it was in quite a mess for that time,
It had been given to a PhD student for the last two
years, and its enrollment had sunk to, I think it
was 150. And so one of my first jobs was to
reorganize the Consultation Symposium, get the
Industrial Steering Committee back together. So
I had that job for five years. from 61 through 66,
and we got the enrollment back up to about 450, and
got it back pretty good shape. And that's
completely outside of my field. I had nothing to
do, and still don't understand process control
very well. And also at that time, I got Leo Durbin
involved, who is in process control, and so Leo
started handling the technical program for the
meeting, which was a pretty good job in itself. But
that's still going on strong, and they just met, I
think it was last week. It's always in January,
usually in the middle of a snowstorm or a sleet or
something, but it's quite good, and people come
from all over the country. In fact, it's still the
second largest instrumentation symposium in the
world, next to the ISA annual. It
may have been. I'm trying to remember. I'll put you
down in that so you can claim that thing right now.
I'm just wondering, to really kind of verify it
before, if there's a note in the archive that was
part of the faculty file that makes you get that.
And I'm not, you know, positive that there's a
letter in the book that says that. In other words,
the South Texas chapter, that started early. Oh,
yes. And you've probably run across the fact that
the South Texas section of AICG, which was the
largest, by far the largest, section of AICG in the
country. It's now a powerful, dominant section.
The last two presidents of AICG are Texans.
Anyway, they are one powerful section. But they
were founded by Doc Lindsey Chalmers Kirkbride,
who was then professor here at A&M, and a couple
other people. But the early officers, the first
officers of the South Texas Section included, I
think, Kirk Wright was president and Lindsey was
secretary or something. Well, but the student
chapter here, I'm a little bit uncertain about,
because, see, I thought that even when I first came
here, there was a student chapter. I know it
bounced around, and like a lot of other
organizations, it may have... sort of died out,
and we had to re-buy it. But I'm not sure I want to
claim credit for, you know, for really... Okay,
but you did become an advisor, right? Yeah, I was an
advisor at the time, and I may have sort of re-buyed
it if it was, you know, not in too good of shape, but
I'm not sure. Before I forget, I'm sorry to
interrupt, but there was one thing I should make
sure you get in here, because it's typical. This
was back in Doc Lindsay's regime, but just rung a
bell, and that is that Grace Lindsay had a thing
that she'd started right after the Second World
War. We had a lot of students here who, of course,
would come back to our services, and they were
married. And so Grace Lindsay had a thing every
year where she gave to the spouses of the graduates
a diploma. which was called the PhD degree,
putting hubby through degree. And this was held at
her house every year with great fanfare. And what
Grace did that made this really such a great place
for the students was she had socials for the wives
of the students, I think two or three every
semester. She got to know them, and she provided a
lot of support for those student wives. And of
course, they were all Doc Lindsey's boys, and they
still are.
And most of them will tell you they've never
forgotten Doc Lindsey, because he really formed
what we call now bonds with the students. I mean, he
bonded with every student here.
That's good. I'm glad you mentioned about Grace,
because she's kind of, you know, not very obvious
of a term. I felt like she obviously had to have some
support. And even I talked with you, and, you know,
you didn't have to say that. Well, Grace... Her dad
ran an iron shop for her. He had four sons. He had
those kind of sons. He did, and... Well, I remember
when I first came, it was kind of humorous, because
at that time, Doc knew that his two oldest sons were
turning out just great. I mean, there's no
question they were already on their way. His
oldest son was teaching school already down in
Houston, and Jim Lindsey, his second son, had
already set up shop here in Bryan as a GP. But
anyway, he wasn't too sure about Hugh and Mark. He
said, well, they're still pretty young. And they
both turned out great, too. But Grace was really an
exceptionally fine lady. And Doc always said that
any of his success was largely due to her.
And she was really the perfect department head's
wife, because she was very personal, but also very
laid back, and not at all pushy, and just a very
pleasant person who worked in well with everybody
like Grace. Now, let me jump ahead to another
question. How did
that impact on the rest of the decade ?
No,
driving while so high, crude oil that high, did
have some positive effects on our research.
People like the National Science Foundation
started paying a lot more attention to
petroleum-related research. And they also
started paying more attention to the engineering
side. They had previously been more, quote,
scientific. They are the National Science
Foundation. But they then became much more
interested in applied research problems,
particularly related to petroleum.
So it did have some, perhaps, positive effects.
But otherwise, in the teaching, most of the
mission here, it didn't, I wouldn't say it had
dramatic effects.
That's good.
The market still remained strong in the 70s. Do you
remember any of that? Yes. Not
very good, but there was a time in there, I believe
it wasn't until maybe the latter 70s when there was
some years in there when it crashed and chemical
engineers then couldn't find jobs. We've gone
through, since I've been here, we've gone through
two or three periods like this where it was
actually difficult for chemical engineers to get
jobs. And this was after years of where everybody
would get five job offers and could take their pick
and it didn't matter if they were not too strong of
students. But we then went through some years
where it was difficult. And what we had to do as a
department was to usually go out and take about the
bottom third of the class and get on the telephone
and find them jobs. And that's where our network of
having so many Aggie graduates of this department
really paid off. Because we've graduated a fair
number of people over a long period of time, as has
the University of Texas at Austin, And together,
we have a lot of old guys out there that are in key
management positions. Can you identify any
special ones that you've looked at? There are
quite a large number. Now, when we formed the first
Lindsay Lectures Committee, this was, I think, in
about, say, 78. It was two years before Doc Lindsay
passed away, but I'm just sort of reading off the
letterhead here that has our committee members.
There are people like Bruner Barnes, who founded
Barnes and Quick Company in Dallas. Is there
identification with their business there? Yes.
Great. That's perfect. Are all of these former
students? Yeah, these are all former students.
Excellent. And let's see, I kind of think... Well,
Paul Dicer is still very much active, and he's a
retired vice president of Shell a while. I might
use that list in the book. That might be, would that
be okay? Oh, sure. Why don't I do that, and I'll just
say these people, for example, are students who
rose to prominent positions, and I'll tie it in
with the implementation of the intellectuals.
Right. And identify them.